---
layout: post
title:  "The Downside of Creating an LLC"
date:   2022-12-16 00:11:11 +0000
categories: jekyll update
---

It is nearly the end of 2022 and I have hopefully just completed the last step in dissolving the California Limited Liability Company (LLC) I established in 2015. In all honesty, the process was not that painful. However, when you combine ignorance, neglect, and unpaid taxes, it became an albatross that I am ready to be done with.

In 2015, I had dreams of starting the next billion dollar software unicorn. I had an idea for a real estate software start up that I imagined would become the new way in which residential real estate would be bought and sold around the world. Keep in mind, I am not a software developer, I had never built software, and wasn’t even that computer literate…

I got my real estate license when I was 19 years old and sold residential real estate to family and friends while I attended undergrad. After I graduated I moved to San Francisco and began selling software. At the time I was selling Applicant Tracking Systems (ATS). ATS software is software to help with recruiting, either for agencies or companies doing in house hiring. To me it appeared that the recruiting process and the home buying process were very similar. A job is like a house, the hiring entity is like the seller and the purchaser is like the job seeker. With this insight, I thought I could build software that functioned similar to an ATS but for Real Estate and dis-intermediate the agent allowing buyers and sellers to connect directly via software.

It is probably worth diving into my mistakes and what I learned, but that is for another time. Ultimately, the start up was unsuccessful and I moved on in 2018. I moved on, notice I didn’t say, “successfully dissolved the legal entity”. I guess I should take a step back first. Around the same time that I decided to build said software, and start the business I thought it would be a good idea to set up a legal entity. Although, it is advised that you consult with an Attorney, CPA, etc., I went the DIY route. I visited the California Secretary of State website, did a little reading, downloaded the 1-page Articles of Organization, filled it out, mailed it in, and viola! I was in business. Well not quite business - I had theoretically shielded myself from personal liability, but I also signed myself up for an additional $800 minimum annual tax that was due to the California Franchise Tax Board (FTB) each year.

With my shiny new legal entity in hand I was able to open a bank account, get an Employer Identification Number (EIN), and little else. An EIN is essentially a Social Security Number for a business. I never had any employees, only independent contracts so it was less complicated legally, and at that time I was primarily just spending money on developing the Web App.

When tax time came, TurboTax was my go to. I had been using TurboTax for years to successfully file and pay my personal taxes, and now that I had a single member pass through LLC I figured no reason to change. I upgraded and paid for the “Professional” version and was guided through the entire process to ultimately file and pay electronically. In fact it was extremely easy, as it turns out too easy… I am not intending to disparage TurboTax, I still use them to prepare my personal taxes and I think it is an incredible product. The mistakes are my own. As it turns out, TurboTax did a great job guiding me through the business tax preparation process and even provided a complete and easy to download PDF version of my completed tax returns. However, they did not transmit and pay electronically the California FTB as I had naively believed.

One of the requirements for maintaining an LLC in California is to file a Statement of Information every two years with the Secretary of State. All said, this is an extremely easy process, there is even an online portal in which you can search, file, and pay in less that 5 minutes. In order to maintain my LLC, I would file the statement of information every two years and go on my way. Since I had ceased my start up aspirations in 2018 and had re-entered the labor force, my intention was to close out my LLC by filing a Certification of Cancellation instead of my usual Statement of Information. At the end of 2020 when I attempted to cancel, to my surprise, I was unable. When I accessed the online portal there was a notice that my LLC was suspended by the FTB. Not realizing what the message meant, I googled around and realized that the FTB was the “Franchise Tax Board”. As you can imagine, at this point my heart sunk. This was the start of my nearly two year ordeal.

I first attempted to login to the online FTB portal to view my account, see what my potential outstanding balance was, and see if I could resolve it myself online. This attempt was unsuccessful. Accessing the portal required information that I did not have or could not recall at the time, and the error messages were nondescript. Thus, I reached a dead end. The next step was to call. During my call with an agent I was able to pinpoint my previous issue, the missing piece of information was the address on file. Unfortunately, from 2015 and 2020 I had moved 4 times and recalling all of the complete addresses was difficult. In the end, the address I had on file was a now defunct co-working space, fortunately I had some old emails with the leasing agent.

After gaining access to my account, I was informed that I did not have an outstanding balance. YES! What a relief. Well…as it turns out there was no outstanding balance because I had never properly filed returns with the FTB. It’s not that I didn’t owe, they just didn’t know how much yet. To the credit of all the people I interacted with at the FTB, they were extremely knowledgeable, professional, and courteous. To say the least I felt like a scumbag. I’m being alerted that I haven't paid the proper taxes in approx. 7 years and my excuse is, “Oh, I thought I was…” even though this was true, I still felt like an imbecile. To their credit, It never felt like they were being condescending or rude, the exact opposite in fact. It felt more like they were on my side, alerting me of all the potential options and what I needed to do.

To set the stage, my LLC currently had no assets, no bank account, no debt, nothing. For all intents and purposes the last year of operations was 2017. I never had any investors or employees, I self funded the venture with savings and some personal debt (i.e credit cards, personal loan) that had since been paid off. The first option I pursued was to file a Request for Voluntary Administrative Cancellation - Form 3716. From my conversations I thought this might be a long shot, as the first question and one of the main requirements for consideration was answering “No” to the following questions.

“Was the domestic LLC ever doing business (that is, actively engaged in any transaction for the purpose of financial, pecuniary gain, or profit)?”

The other requirements had to do with having any current assets or debts, so I figured it was possible depending on their definition/ interpretation of doing business. For 2015 - 2017 my “doing business” was strictly limited to expenses, so I thought I had a shot. It turns out this disqualified me.

When I received the written notice that I was not eligible for the Administrative Cancellation, I got back on the phone with the FTB. This time, I was told of a program that might work, the Offer In Compromise - Form 4095 BE. In order to explore this option I first needed to file my missing returns. Fortunately, I actually had been completing them in TurboTax each year and all I needed to do now was simply find the saved PDF versions, print them out, and fax them in. So, that is what I did. I located the Limited Liability Company Return of Income - Form 568, and faxed them to the FTB with my completed Offer in Compromise. At this time I did not know what my exact liability would be, but I was able to estimate it over the phone with the FTB agent, so I had a decent idea of what it would be. Yes, the past due balances do accrue interest. The amount I owed was close to $8,000, this is significantly more than the $5,600 that you get by multiplying $800 a year by 7 years. With this number in hand, I crafted an offer based on what I could feasibly pay in one lump sum, as that is what was required.

After approximately three months, I received a voicemail from the FTB that they had received my Offer in Compromise and wanted to discuss my eligibility for the program. We ultimately settled on an amount, it was higher than my initial offer, but still significantly less then the total outstanding. From my understanding this was primarily based on ability to pay, likely hood of the FTB collecting more in a reasonable amount of time, and my desire to dissolve/cancel the LLC with the California Secretary of State after the FTB had removed the suspension. With this understanding reached, I obtained a cashiers check and mailed it to the FTB.

Although I was not guaranteed that this amount would close out my account (it still needed to be reviewed and signed off on by management), I was hopeful that my LLC ordeal was coming to an end. Nearly 45 days later, I received a letter in the mail stating that my offer had been accepted. With my letter in hand completed and mailed to the CA Secretary of State the Certificate of Cancellation - LLC 4/7.
